At Home in the Universe
Out my window, just west of Santa Fe, lies the near spiritual landscape of northern New Mexico—barrancas, mesas, holy lands, the Rio Grande—home to the oldest civilization in North America. So much, so ancient and modern, pregnant with the remote past and the next millennium mingle here, haphazardly, slightly drunk with anticipation. Forty miles away lies Los Alamos, brilliance of mind, brilliance of flashing light that desert dawning in 1945, half a century ago, half our assumptions ago. Just beyond spreads the Valle Grande, remains of an archaic mountain said to have been over 30,000 feet high that blew its top, scattering ash to Arkansas, leaving obsidian for later, finer workings.
Some months ago, I found myself at lunch with Gunter Mahler, a theoretical physicist from Munich visiting the Santa Fe Institute, where a group of colleagues and I are engaged in a search for laws of complexity that would explain the strange patterns that spring up around us. Gunter looked northward, past pinon and juniper, taking in the long view toward Colorado, and somewhat astonished me by asking what my image of paradise was. As I groped for an answer, he proposed one: not the high mountains, or the ocean's edges, or flat lands. Rather, he suggested, just such terrain as lay before us, long and rolling under strong light, far ranges defining a distant horizon toward which graceful and telling land forms march in
    3
 fading procession. For reasons I do not completely understand, I felt he was right. We soon fell to speculations about the landscape of East Africa, and wondered whether, in fact, we might conceivably carry some genetic memory of our birthplace, our real Eden, our first home.
What stories we tell ourselves, of origins and endings, of form and transformation, of gods, the word, and law. All people, at all times,
must have created myths and stories to sketch a picture of our place under the sun. Cro-Magnon man, whose paintings of animals seem to exhibit a respect and awe, let alone line and form, that equals or surpasses those of later millennia, must have spun answers to these questions: Who are we? Where did we come from? Why are we here? Did Neanderthal, Homo habilis, or Homo erectus ask? Around which fire in the past 3 million years of hominid evolution did these questions first arise? Who knows.
Somewhere along our path, paradise has been lost, lost to the Western mind, and in the spreading world civilization, lost to our collective mind. John Milton must have been the last superb poet of Western civilization who could have sought to justify the ways of God to man in those early years foreshadowing the modern era. Paradise has been lost, not to sin, but to science. Once, a scant few centuries ago, we of the West believed ourselves the chosen of God, made in his image, keeping his word in a creation wrought by his love for us. Now, only 400 years later, we find ourselves on a tiny planet, on the edge of a humdrum galaxy among billions like it scattered across vast megaparsecs, around the curvature of space-time back to the Big Bang. We are but accidents, we're told. Purpose and value are ours alone to make. Without Satan and God, the universe now appears the neutral home of matter, dark and light, and is utterly indifferent. We bustle, but are no longer at home in the ancient sense.
We accept, of course, that the rise of science and the consequent technological explosion has driven us to our secular worldview Yet a spiritual hunger remains. I recently met N. Scott Momaday, a Native American author, winner of the Pulitzer Prize, at a small meeting in northern New Mexico intended to try to articulate the fundamental issues facing humanity. (As if a small group of thinkers could possibly succeed.) Momaday told us that the central issue we confront is to reinvent the sacred. He told of a sacred shield of the Kiowa, sanctified by the sacrifices and suffering of the warriors who had been honored to hold it in battle. The shield had been stolen following a battle with U.S. cavalry forces after the Civil War. He told us of the recent discovery and return of the shield from the family home of the post-Civil War general who had taken it. Momaday deep voice fell gently over us as he described the welcome set forth for that shield and the place it holds, quiet, somber, still, revered for the passion and suffering distilled within its arc.
Momaday's search for the sacred settled deep on me, for I hold the hope that what some are calling the new sciences of complexity may help us find anew our place in the universe, that through this new science,
we may recover our sense of worth, our sense of the sacred, just as the Kiowa ultimately recovered that sacred shield. At the same meeting, I suggested that the most important problem confronting humanity was the emergence of a world civilization, its profound promise, and the cultural dislocations this transformation will cause. To undergird the pluralistic global community that is aborning, we shall need, I think, an expanded intellectual basis—a new way to think about origins, evolution, and the profound naturalness of life and its myriad patterns of unfolding. This book is an effort to contribute to that new view, for the emerging sciences of complexity, as we shall see, offer fresh support for the idea of a pluralistic democratic society, providing evidence that it is not merely a human creation but part of the natural order of things. One is always wary of deducing from first principles the political order of one's own society. The nineteenth- century philosopher James Mill once succeeded in deducing from first principles that a constitutional monarchy, remarkably like that in England early in the last century, was the highest natural form of governance. But, as I hope to show, the very laws of complexity my colleagues and I are seeking suggest that democracy has evolved as perhaps the optimal mechanism to achieve the best attainable compromises among conflicting practical, political, and moral interests. Momaday must be right as well. We shall also need to reinvent the sacred—this sense of our own deep worth—and reinvest it at the core of the new civilization.
The story of our loss of paradise is familiar but worth retelling. Until Copernicus, we believed ourselves to be at the center of the universe. Nowadays, in our proclaimed sophistication, we look askance at a church that sought to suppress a heliocentric view. Knowledge for knowledge's sake, we say. Yes, of course. But was the church's concern with the disruption of a moral order really no more than a narrow vanity? To pre-Copernican Christian civilization, the geocentric view was no mere matter of science. Rather, it was the cornerstone evidence that the entire universe revolved around us. With God, angels, man, the beasts, and fertile plants made for our benefit, with the sun and stars wheeling overhead, we
    4

 knew our place: at the center of God's creation. The church feared rightly that the Copernican views would ultimately dismantle the unity of a thousand-year-old tradition of duty and rights, of obligations and roles, of moral fabric.
Copernicus blew his society open. Galileo and Kepler did not help much either, particularly Kepler, with his demonstration that planets orbit in ellipses rather than in the rational perfect circles envisioned by Aristotle. Kepler is such a wonderful transitional figure, a descendant of
the tradition of the magus, or great magi a century earlier. He had not sought ellipses, but rather harmonic orbits corresponding to the five perfect solids, from which Plato himself tried to build the world.
Then Newton, hero to us all, escaped the plague and wrenched Everyman into a universe even farther from paradise. What a giant step he took. Just imagine what it must have felt like to Newton as his new laws of mechanics took form in his mind. What wonder he must have felt. With a mere three laws oî motion and a universal law of gravitation in hand, Newton not only derived tides and orbits, but unleashed on the Western mind a clockwork universe. Before Newton, a scholastic philosopher, certain that an arrow arced toward its target because, as Aristotle taught, it was constantly acted on by a mysterious force, or impetus, could easily believe in a God who also moved things along by according them his sustained attention. Such a God might look after one if properly addressed. Such a God might return one to paradise. But after Newton, the laws alone sufficed. The universe could be wound up by God and released, thereafter left to tick inevitably toward eternity under the unfolding of his law, without further intervention. If the stars and tides moved without divine intervention, thinking people began to find it more difficult to hope for such intervention in their own affairs.
But there was some consolation. If the planets and all of inanimate matter obey eternal laws, then surely living things, with man at their summit, sitting at the top of the great chain of being, must reflect God's intention. Adam himself had named them all: insects, fish, reptiles, birds, mammals, man. Like the hierarchy of the church itself—laity, priest, bishop, archbishop, pope, saints, angels—the great chain of being stretched from the lowliest to the Almighty.
How Darwin and his theory of evolution by natural selection devastated all this ! We, who are heritors of Darwin, who see the living world through the categories he taught us more than a century ago, even we have trouble with the implications: man as the result of a chain of accidental mutations, sifted by a law no more noble than survival of the fittest. Creation science is no accident in late-twentieth-century America. Its proponents adhere to it in an ardent effort to forestall the feared moral implications of humans as descendants of a haphazard lineage branching from some last common ancestor more remote in time than the Cambrian explosion some 500 million years ago. The science in creation science is no science at all, but is the moral anguish so foolish? Or should creationism be viewed rather more sympathetically—misguided, to be sure, but part of a broader quest to reinvent the sacred in our secular world?
Before Darwin, the so-called Rational Morphologists found comfort
in the view that species were not the result of random mutation and selection, but of timeless laws of form. The finest eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century biologists, comparing living forms, classified them into the hierarchical groupings of Linnean taxonomy that remain with us today: species, genera, families, orders, classes, phyla, and kingdoms—an order as natural and cosmically ordained to the scientists of that time as the great chain of being was to the Catholic church. Given the obvious morphological overlaps, these scientists sought lawful explanations of the similarities and differences. An analogy that helps us understand this aim can be found by thinking of crystals, which can exist only in certain forms. The Rational Morphologists, confronting fixed but highly similar species, sought similar regularities. Surely the pectoral fin of a fish, the bones of a petrel's wings, and the flashing legs of a horse were expressions of the same deep principle.
Darwin devastated this world. Species are not fixed by the squares of the Linnean chart; they evolve from one another. Natural selection acting on random variation, not God or some principle of Rational Morphology, accounted for the similarity of limb and fin, for creatures so marvelously attuned to their environments. The implications of these ideas, as understood by biologists today, have transformed humans, along with all other living forms, from works of a creator into ultimately historical accidents wrought by the opportunism of evolution. "Evolution is chance caught on the wing," wrote the biologist Jacques Monod. Evolution tinkers together contraptions, agreed François Jacob, the French geneticist who shared the Nobel with Monod. In the Judeo-Christian tradition, we had become used to thinking of ourselves as fallen angels. At least fallen angels have some hope of redemption and grace, of climbing back up the ecclesiastical ladder. Evolution left us stuck on the earth with no ladder to climb, contemplating our fate as nature's Rube Goldberg machines.
    5

 Random variation, selection sifting. Here is the core, the root. Here lies the brooding sense of accident, of historical contingency, of design by elimination. At least physics, cold in its calculus, implied a deep order, an inevitability. Biology has come to seem a science of the accidental, the ad hoc, and we just one of the fruits of this ad hocery Were the tape played over, we like to say, the forms of organisms would surely differ dramatically. We humans, a trumped-up, tricked- out, horn-blowing, self-important presence on the globe, need never have occurred. So much for our pretensions; we are lucky to have our hour. So much, too, for paradise.
Where, then, does this order come from, this teeming life I see from my window: urgent spider making her living with her pre-nylon web,
coyote crafty across the ridgetop, muddy Rio Grande aswarm with no-see-ems (an invisible insect peculiar to early evenings)? Since Darwin, we turn to a single, singular force, Natural Selection, which we might as well capitalize as though it were the new diety. Random variation, selection-sifting. Without it, we reason, there would be nothing but incoherent disorder.
I shall argue in this book that this idea is wrong. For, as we shall see, the emerging sciences of complexity begin to suggest that the order is not all accidental, that vast veins of spontaneous order lie at hand. Laws of complexity spontaneously generate much of the order of the natural world. It is only then that selection comes into play, further molding and refining. Such veins of spontaneous order have not been entirely unknown, yet they are just beginning to emerge as powerful new clues to the origins and evolution of life. We have all known that simple physical systems exhibit spontaneous order: an oil droplet in water forms a sphere; snowflakes exhibit their evanescent sixfold symmetry. What is new is that the range of spontaneous order is enormously greater than we have supposed. Profound order is being discovered in large, complex, and apparently random systems. I believe that this emergent order underlies not only the origin of life itself, but much of the order seen in organisms today. So, too, do many of my colleagues, who are starting to find overlapping evidence of such emergent order in all different kinds of complex systems.
The existence of spontaneous order is a stunning challenge to our settled ideas in biology since Darwin. Most biologists have believed for over a century that selection is the sole source of order in biology, that selection alone is the "tinkerer" that crafts the forms. But if the forms selection chooses among were generated by laws of complexity, then selection has always had a handmaiden. It is not, after all, the sole source of order, and organisms are not just tinkered-together contraptions, but expressions of deeper natural laws. If all this is true, what a revision of the Darwinian worldview will lie before us! Not we the accidental, but we the expected.
The revision of the Darwinian worldview will not be easy. Biologists have, as yet, no conceptual framework in which to study an evolutionary process that commingles both self-organization and selection. How does selection work on systems that already generate spontaneous order? Physics has its profound spontaneous order, but no need of selection. Biologists, subliminally aware of such spontaneous order, have nevertheless ignored it and focused almost entirely on selection. Without a framework to embrace both self-organization and selection, self-organization has been rendered almost invisible, like the background in
a gestalt picture. With a sudden visual shift, the background can become the foreground, and the former foreground, selection, can become the background. Neither alone suffices. Life and its evolution have always depended on the mutual embrace of spontaneous order and selection's crafting of that order. We need to paint a new picture.
Genesis
Two conceptual lineages from the nineteenth century linked to complete our sense of accidental isolation in the swirl of stars. In addition to Darwin, the science of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, from the French engineer Sadi Carnot to the physicists Ludwig Boltzmann and Josiah Willard Gibbs, gave us the seemingly mysterious second law of thermodynamics: In equilibrium systems—those closed to the exchange of matter and energy with their environment—a measure of disorder called entropy inevitably increases. We have all seen the simple examples. A droplet of dark blue ink in a dish of still water diffuses to a uniform light blue. The ink does not reassemble into a single droplet.
Boltzmann gave us the modern understanding of the second law. Consider a box filled with gas molecules, modeled as hard elastic spheres. All the molecules could be in a small corner of the box, or they could be spread out more or less uniformly. One arrangement is just as unlikely as any other. But a vastly larger number of the possible configurations correspond to
    6

 situations in which the molecules are more or less uniformly distributed than to situations with all the molecules confined, say, to a single corner. Boltzmann argued that the increase in entropy in equilibrium systems arises from nothing more than the statistical tendency of the system to pass randomly through all possible arrangements (the so-called ergodic hypothesis). In the vast majority of these cases, the molecules will be distributed uniformly. And so, on average, that is what we will see. The ink droplet diffuses and does not reassemble; the gas molecules diffuse from one corner of the box and do not reassemble. Left to itself, a system will visit all possible microscopic, finegrained configurations equally often. But the system will spend most of its time in those coarse-grained patterns satisfied by very large numbers of fine-grained patterns—molecules uniformly distributed throughout the box. So the second law is not so mysterious, after all.
The consequence of the second law is that in equilibrium systems, order—the most unlikely of the arrangements—tends to disappear. If order is defined as those coarse-grained states that correspond to only a few fine-grained states (molecules bunched in the upper-left-hand cor-
ner, molecules arranged in a plane parallel to the top of the box), then at thermodynamic equilibrium, those delicate arrangements disappear because of the ergodic wandering of the system through all its mi-crostates. It follows that the maintenance of order requires that some form of work be done on the system. In the absence of work, order disappears. Hence we come to our current sense that an incoherent collapse of order is the natural state of things. Again, we the accidental, we the unexpected.
The second law of thermodynamics has been thought to be rather gloomy. One almost imagines the grave headlines: UNIVERSE RUNNING DOWN. HEAT DEATH HEADED OUR WAY. DISORDER IS ORDER OF THE DAY. How far we have come from the blessed children of God, at the center of the universe, walking among creatures created for our benefit, in a garden called Eden. Science, not sin, has indeed lost us our paradise.
If the universe is running down because of the second law, the easy evidence out my window is sparse—some litter here and there, and the heat given off by me, a homeotherm, scrambling the molecules of air. It is not entropy but the extraordinary surge toward order that strikes me. Trees grabbing sunlight from a star eight light-minutes away, swirling its photons together with mere water and carbon dioxide to cook up sugars and fancier carbohydrates; legumes sucking nitrogen from bacteria clinging to their roots to create proteins. I eagerly breathe the waste product of this photosynthesis, oxygen—the worst poison of the archaic world, when anaerobic bacteria ruled—and give off the carbon dioxide that feeds the trees. The biosphere around us sustains us, is created by us, grafts the energy flux from the sun into the great web of biochemical, biological, geologic, economic, and political exchanges that envelopes the world. Thermodynamics be damned. Genesis, thank whatever lord may be, has occurred. We all thrive.
The earliest signs of life on earth are present 3.45 billion years ago, 300 million years after the crust cooled sufficiently to support liquid water. These signs of life are hardly trivial. Well-formed cells, or what the experts believe are cells, are present in the archaic rocks from that period. Figure 1.1 shows such ancient fossils. Figure 1.2a shows contemporary coccoid cyanobacteria, while Figure 1.2b shows similar fossil cyanobacteria from 2.15 billion years ago. The morphological similarity is stunning. These ancient cells appear to have a cell membrane that separates an internal milieu from an external environment. Of course, morphological similarity does not demonstrate biochemical or metabolic similarity, but we look at these fossils with the chilling feeling that we are seeing imprints of the universal ancestor.
Cells were undoubtedly the triumphant culmination of some form of
    7

  Figure 1.1 The ancestors of us all: fossils, 3.437 billion years old. Each photograph is accompanied by an artist's rendition.
evolution from the earliest webs of interacting molecules complex enough to exhibit the qualities we call alive: the ability to metabolize, to reproduce, and to evolve. In turn, the origin of precellular life was itself the triumphant culmination of some form of prebiotic chemical evolution, which led from the limited diversity of molecular species present in the gas cloud of the protoearth to the enhanced chemical diversity that underwrote the crystallization of life, of self-reproducing molecular systems.
But once cells were invented, a numbing lassitude befell our earliest ancestors. Something like simple single-celled organisms, presumably related to current archaebacteria, and later, elongated tubelike cells that presumably were precursors of early fungi, seem to have formed a
a
   8

  b
Figure 1.2 Ancient fossil cells and modern living cells show a stunning resemblance, (a) Living coccoid cyanobacteria colony, (b) Fossil coccoid cyanobacteria colony, 2.15 billion years old, from Canada.
global co-prosperity sphere that persisted for perhaps 3 billion rather dull years. These progenitors of all later ecosystems formed complex local economies in which bacterial species and algae, competing and collaborating with one another, formed complex mound structures, typically several meters across and several meters high. Contemporary mounds are found in abundance along the Great Barrier Reef on the northeastern coast of Australia. Fossilized versions of these mounds are called stromatoliths. Presumably, these simple ecosystems covered the shallow coastal waters of the globe. Even today, the same type of formations are found in shallow waters in the Gulf of California and Australia. Contemporary mounds harbor hundreds of bacterial species and a modest number of algal species. One guesses that archaic mound systems were of a similar complexity.
Such single-celled life-forms persisted alone in the biosphere for perhaps 3 billion years—most of the age of the earth. But life-forms were destined to change by some unknown agency, some pregnancy of possibilities. Was it Darwinian chance and selection alone, as biologists have argued for decades? Or, as I shall propose in this book, did principles
of self-organization mingle with chance and necessity? By perhaps 800 million years ago, multicellular organisms appeared. The routes to the formation of such multicellular life remain obscure, although some workers believe that it occurred when a tubelike protofungi began to form internal walls that perhaps later became individual cells.
All hell broke loose in the Cambrian explosion, about 550 million years ago. A burst of evolutionary creativity generated almost all the major phyla now jostling one another in nooks and crannies on, above, under the earth's surface, everywhere, even thousands of feet down in solid rock. Only the vertebrates, our own lineage, arose a bit later, in Ordovician times.
The history of life in the first 100 million years following the Cambrian explosion was one of bustling confusion. And its mysteries are yet to be solved. The Linnean chart groups organisms hierarchically, from the specific to the general: species, genera, families, orders, classes, phyla, and kingdoms. One might imagine that the first multicellular creatures would all be very similar, only later diversifying, from the bottom up, into different genera, families, orders, classes, and so on. That, indeed, would be the expectation of the strictest conventional Darwinist. Darwin, profoundly influenced by the emerging view of geologic gradualism, proposed that all evolution occurred by the very gradual accumulation of useful variations. Thus the earliest multicellular creatures themselves ought to have diverged gradually from one another. But this appears to be false. One of the wonderful and puzzling features of the Cambrian explosion is that the chart was filled in from the top down. Nature suddenly sprang forth with many wildly different body plans—the phyla—elaborating on these basic designs to form the classes, orders, families, and genera.
In his book about the Cambrian explosion, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History, Stephen Jay Gould remarks on this top-down quality of the Cambrian with wonder. In the Permian extinction, 245 million years ago, 96 percent of all species disappeared. But in the rebound, during which many new species evolved, diversity filled in from the bottom up, with many new families, a few new orders, one new class, and no new phyla.
Many are the arguments about this asymmetry between the Cambrian and the Permian explosions. My own view, explored in later chapters, is that the Cambrian explosion is like the earliest stages of the technological evolution of an entirely novel invention, such as the bicycle. Recall the funny early forms: big front wheels, little back ones; little front wheels, big back ones. A flurry of forms branched outward over Europe and the United States and elsewhere, giving rise to major and minor
    9

 variants. Soon after a major innovation, discovery of profoundly different variations is easy. Later innovation is limited to modest improvements on increasingly optimized designs.
So it was, I think, in the Cambrian, when multicellular life first tested out its possible modes of being. The particular branchings of life, were the tape played again, might differ, but the patterns of the branching, dramatic at first, then dwindling to twiddling with details later, are likely to be lawful. Biological evolution may be a deeply historical process, as Darwin taught us, but lawlike at the same time.
As we shall see in later chapters, the parallels between branching evolution in the tree of life and branching evolution in the tree of technology bespeak a common theme: both the evolution of complex organisms and the evolution of complex artifacts confront conflicting "design criteria." Heavier bones are stronger, but may make agile flight harder to achieve. Heavier beams are stronger, but may make agile fighter aircraft harder to achieve as well. Conflicting design criteria, in organism or artifact, create extremely difficult "optimization" problems—juggling acts in which the aim is to find the best array of compromises. In such problems, crudely designed major innovations can be greatly improved by dramatic variations on the new theme. Later on, as most of the major innovations have been tried, improvements dwindle to mere fiddling with the details. If something like this is true, then evolution's cadences may find echos in the evolution of artifacts and cultural forms we human tinkerers create.
The past 550 million years have witnessed well-fossilized life-forms emerging onto and then ebbing from the stage. Speciation and extinction go roughly hand in hand. Indeed, recent evidence suggests that the highest rate of extinction, as well as speciation, occurred in the Cambrian itself. Over the next 100 million years, the average diversity of species increased to a kind of rough steady state. But that level was, and persistently is, perturbed by small and large avalanches of extinctions that wipe out modest numbers or large numbers of species, genera, or families. Many of these catastrophes may have been caused by small and large meteors. Indeed, the extinction at the end of the Cretaceous, which coincided with the denouement of the dinosaurs, was probably caused by a massive misfortune that landed near the Yucatan.
In this book, I shall explore a different possibility. It does not always take a meteor or some outside cataclysm to wipe out whole species. Rather, speciation and extinction seem very likely to reflect the spontaneous dynamics of a community of species. The very struggle to survive, to adapt to the small and large changes of one's coevolutionary partners, may ultimately drive some species to extinction while creating novel
niches for others. Life, then, unrolls in an unending procession of change, with small and large bursts of speciations, and small and large bursts of extinctions, ringing out the old, ringing in the new. If this view is correct, then the patterns of life's bursts and burials are caused by internal processes, endogenous and natural. These patterns of speciations and extinctions, avalanching across ecosystems and time, are somehow self-organized, somehow collective emergent phenomena, somehow natural expressions of the laws of complexity we seek. And somehow, when understood, such patterns must afford us a deeper understanding of the game we have all joined, for we are all part of the same pageant.
No small matter these small and large avalanches of creativity and destruction, for the natural history of life for the past 550 million years has echoes of the same phenomena at all levels: from ecosystems to economic systems undergoing technological evolution, in which avalanches of new goods and technologies emerge and drive old ones extinct. Similar small and large avalanches even occur in evolving cultural systems. The natural history of life may harbor a new and unifying intellectual underpinning for our economic, cultural, and social life. I will spend much of this book unpacking the grounds to think that a deep theory for such ceaseless change can be found. I suspect that the fate of all complex adapting systems in the biosphere—from single cells to economies—is to evolve to a natural state between order and chaos, a grand compromise between structure and surprise. Here, at this poised state, small and large avalanches of coevolutionary change propagate through the system as a consequence of the small, best choices of the actors themselves, competing and cooperating to survive. I will suggest that, on small and large scales, we all do the best we can but will eventually be hustled offstage by some unanticipated consequences of our own best efforts. We will find a place in the sun, poised on the edge of chaos, sustained for a time in that sun's radiance, but only for a moment before we slip from sight. Untold many actors come and go, each, as a fine playwright once said, strutting and fretting its hour upon the stage. A smiling irony is our fate.
We all make our livings—frog, fern, bracken, bird, seafarer, or landed gentry. From the metabolic mutualisms of legume root and nitrogen-fixing bacteria, by which each makes a nutrient needed by the other, to the latest research partnership between drug giant and small biotech firm, we are all selling and trading our stuff to one another to get our daily bread. And somehow, the burgeoning diversity of the Cambrian— where each new species offers a novel niche or two to the others that feed on it, flee from it, or share with it—looks rather like the burgeoning diversity of an economic system in which each new good or service
  10

   affords a niche or two for other goods or services, whose providers thereby make a living. We are all trading our stuff to one another. We all must make our living. Might general laws govern all this activity? Might general laws govern phenomena ranging from the Cambrian explosion to our postmodern technological era, in which the exploding rate of innovation brings the time horizon of future shock ever closer? That is the possibility I will be exploring in this book.
The Laws of Life
Whence cometh all this activity, complexity, and exuberant chutzpah? If the physicists are right, all this diversity can only be understood as a consequence of the fundamental laws they have sought since Kepler and Galileo started becoming too advanced for the church. This most profound of scientific hopes, this search for fundamental laws, is to be held in the deepest respect: it is the ideal of reductionism in science. As Steven Weinberg phrased it in his recent book title, it is the "dream of a final theory. " Weinberg's characterization of the ancient quest is heartfelt. We seek reductionist explanations. Economic and social phenomena are to be explained in terms of human behavior. In turn, that behavior is to be explained in terms of biological processes, which are in turn to be explained by chemical processes, and they in turn by physical ones.
Much has been said about the validity of the reductionist program. But this much all of us would agree on: if we should find the final theory—perhaps superstrings embedded in 10-dimensional space with 6 dimensions curled in on themselves, and the remaining 4 whipped into some topological foam of quantized space-time, allowing gravity and the other three forces to fit into one conceptual framework—if we should find the final theory, we should have only begun our task. For on that genuinely magnificent day when the fundamental law should be graven forever on some Carrara marble stele or, as the physicist Leon Lederman suggests, on the front of a T-shirt, we should then truly have to begin to compute the consequences of that law.
Could we ever hope to carry out this second half of the reductionist program? Could we use the laws to understand the biosphere we see? We confront here the distinction between explaining and predicting. A table of the tides predicts but does not explain. Newton's theory predicts and explains. Many biologists think that Darwin's theory explains but only weakly predicts. Our final theory of physics might well explain, but almost certainly will not predict in detail. Failure to predict can it-
self already be predicted on at least two grounds. The first is quantum mechanics, which ensures a fundamental indeterminism at the subatomic level. Since that indeterminism has macroscopic consequences—for example, a random quantum event can cause a mutation in DNA molecules—we appear to be fundamentally forbidden from deriving detailed specific predictions about all molecular and supramolecular events. The second difficulty derives from the mathematical field now known as chaos theory. The central idea is simple and is captured in the so-called butterfly effect: a legendary butterfly flapping its wings in Rio changes the weather in Chicago. (I have lived in Chicago and personally suspect that nothing can change the weather there.) It always appears to be the same butterfly whenever anyone tells of this example. One would think it possible to imagine, by a vast conceptual leap, some other example: a moth in Omaha, perhaps, or a starling in Sheboygan. Whatever winged creature is responsible, the point is that any small change in a chaotic system can, and typically does, have large and amplifying effects. Thus this sensitivity implies that the detailed initial condition—how fast, at what angle, and precisely how the starling flapped its wings—would have to be known to infinite precision to predict the result. But both practical and quantum considerations preclude such a possibility. Thus the familiar conclusion: for chaotic systems, we cannot predict long-term behavior. Note again that failure to predict does not mean failure to understand or to explain. Indeed, if we were confident we knew the equations governing a chaotic system, we would be confident we understood its behavior, including our incapacity to predict in detail its long-term behavior.
If we will often, in general and in principle, be precluded from making detailed predictions with the final theory, then what can we hope for? I once listened with considerable interest to an interior decorator whose design sense was demonstrably better than my own. I learned a useful phrase: it's that kind of thing. Now here is a phrase that has quite cosmic usefulness, for even in our incapacity to predict details, we can still have every hope of predicting kinds of things. The hope here is to characterize classes of properties of systems that, in senses to be made more precise later, are typical or generic and do not depend on the details. For example, when water freezes, one does not know where every water molecule is, but a lot can be said about your typical lump of ice. It has a characteristic temperature, color, and hardness—"robust" or "generic" features that do not depend on the details of its construction. And so it might be with complex systems such as organisms and economies. Not knowing the details we nevertheless can build theories that seek to explain the generic properties.
    11

Advances in theoretical science have often been based on finding useful compact descriptions of a phenomenon of interest. The reduced description does not capture all the features of the phenomenon, just those that are fundamentally relevant. A simple example is the pendulum of a grandfather dock, or, in fancier terms, a harmonic oscillator. The pendulum might be described in terms of composition, length, weight, color, engravings on its surface, distance from other objects, and so on. But to understand the fundamental property of periodic motion, length and mass are important; the rest are not. Statistical mechanics gives us our clearest example of the use of statistically averaged, hence typical and generic, properties as compact descriptors of a complex system. Temperature and pressure are averaged properties of a volume of gas at equilibrium that are typically insensitive to the detailed behaviors of individual gas molecules.
Statistical mechanics demonstrates that we can build theories about those properties of complex systems that are insensitive to the details. But the statistical mechanics of gases is relatively simple, for all the gas molecules obey the same Newtonian laws of motion, and we seek to understand the averaged collective motions of the gas molecules. Familiar statistical mechanics concerns simple random systems. Organisms are not simple random systems, but highly complex, heterogeneous systems that have evolved for almost 4 billion years. Discovering the existence of key biological properties of complex living systems that do not depend on all the details lies at the center of a hope to build a deep theory of biological order. If all properties of living systems depend on every detail of their structure and logic, if organisms are arbitrary widgets inside arbitrary contraptions all the way down, then the epistemological problems that confront us in attempting to understand the wonder of the biosphere will be vast. If, instead, core phenomena of the deepest importance do not depend on all the details, then we can hope to find beautiful and deep theories. For example, ontogeny, the development of a fertilized egg into an adult, is controlled by networks of genes and their products in each cell of the body. If this unfolding depends on every small detail of the network, then understanding the order in organisms would require knowing all those details. Instead, I shall give strong grounds in later chapters to think that much of the order seen in development arises almost without regard for how the networks of interacting genes are strung together. Such order is robust and emergent, a kind of collective crystallization of spontaneous structure. Here is order whose origin and character we can hope to explain independently of the details. Here is spontaneous order that selection then goes on to mold.
The search for such properties is emerging as a fundamental research strategy, one I shall make much use of in this book. In these cases, one hopes to explain, understand, and even predict the occurrence of these generic emergent properties; however, one gives up the dream of predicting the details. Examples that we shall explore include the origin of life as a collective emergent property of complex systems of chemicals, the development of the fertilized egg into the adult as an emergent property of complex networks of genes controlling one another's activities, and the behavior of coevolving species in ecosystems that generates small and large avalanches of extinction and speciation. In all these cases, the order that emerges depends on robust and typical properties of the systems, not on the details of structure and function. Under a vast range of different conditions, the order can barely help but express itself.
But how would such laws of emergent order, if they should someday be found, be reconciled with the random mutations and opportunistic selections of Darwinism? How can life be contingent, unpredictable, and accidental while obeying general laws? The same question arises when we think about history. Historians have differed, some eschewing any hope of finding general laws. I, surely no historian, shall nevertheless have suggestions to make. For the hope arises that viewed on the most general level, living systems—cells, organisms, economies, societies—may all exhibit lawlike properties, yet be graced with a lacework of historical filigree, those wonderful details that could easily have been otherwise, whose very unlikelihood elicits our awed admiration.